agriculture blogpost (#196)
xmartlabs/blog: _posts/2022-03-28-farming-with-machine-learning.md

---
layout: post
title: Precision Agriculture And The Future of Farming with Machine Learning

> date: '2022-03-28T10:00:00.000-03:00'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: '2022-03-29T10:00:00.000-03:00'
```

author: Valentina Bianco

> tags: [Machine Learning applied in agriculture industry, deep learning in agriculture industry]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: [applied Machine Learning, Machine Learning in Agriculture, deep learning for agriculture, production costs]
```

author_id: vale
show: true
category: machine-learning
featured_image: /images/farming-ml/MLAgriculture.jpg
permalink: /blog/precision-agriculture-and-the-future-of-farming-with-machine-learning/
---

Maintaining a plantation, whether it’s for forestry or crops, has never been more expensive ([costs per acre in the US have risen 170% since the 70s](https://www.extension.iastate.edu/agdm/crops/pdf/a1-21.pdf)). And this is partly due to the increasing costs of maintaining weed-free fields.

Weed detection and control in small and large farms has become a challenge. Herbicide usage has increased ([527 million pounds in the last 20 years](https://enveurope.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/2190-4715-24-24#:~:text=Herbicide%2Dresistant%20crop%20technology%20has,kilograms%20(123%20million%20pounds).))), and although its price has not necessarily decreased, never have people spent more on it (a whopping $6.6 billion yearly in the US alone).

> Machine Learning and [Computer Vision](https://blog.xmartlabs.com/blog/computer-vision-techniques-for-body-detection/) have provided solutions to tackle the challenges producers face regarding weed control. In the following use case, we’ll discuss the critical problems around herbicides and irrigation and how ML tech has helped reduce its economic and environmental costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Machine Learning and [Computer Vision](https://blog.xmartlabs.com/blog/computer-vision-techniques-for-body-detection/) have provided solutions to tackle the challenges producers face regarding weed control. In the following post, we’ll discuss the critical problems around herbicides and irrigation and how ML tech has helped reduce its economic and environmental costs.
```

 

<aside>

> 👉 If you’re struggling with weed control and high production costs, contact our team, and let’s see how we can leverage our ML knowledge to find a solution for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
👉 If you’re struggling with high production costs, contact our team, and let’s see how we can leverage our ML knowledge to find a solution for you.
```

</aside>

## The problem with weed control in agriculture

> Agricultural producers have to address three main problems when facing the challenges of growing weed amongst their plantations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Agricultural producers have to address three main problems when facing the issue of weeds growing amongst their plantations:
```

- The cost it infers.
- The damage to the soil.

> - Resistance of the weeds to certain herbicides (which means more fees).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Resistance of the weeds to certain herbicides (which means more costs).
```

### Rising costs of battling weeds

Overuse or waste of herbicides has increased production costs considerably. According to the latest Cost of Crop estimation by the [Iowa State University](http://extension.iastate.edu/agdm/crops/pdf/a1-20.pdf), in 2022, herbicide will account for 25% of the total cost per acre of planting soybeans (a lot compared to the 8% it represented a decade earlier, in 2012, according to the same study). It’s also increasing faster than other production costs, having almost doubled in the last decade. However, its usage has not wavered; 3 billion pounds of herbicides are used yearly.

> Worst of all, the costly herbicide doesn’t always reach its target because broadcast-spraying (the most common weed control method) sometimes causes the chemical not to hit the targeted weed or land on soil and healthy plants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Worst of all, the costly herbicide doesn’t always reach its target because broadcast-spraying (the most common weed control method) sometimes causes the chemical not to hit the targeted weed, landing on soil and healthy plants.
```

### Impact of herbicides on soil

Application of herbicides can disrupt earthworm ecology, inhibit soil [N-cycling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nitrogen_cycle), and increase disease, altering soil function. And although impacts might be minor or temporary, herbicide application is still risky. It may be a “necessary evil”, but it’s worth mentioning some of the damage it’s been proven to cause, especially if these side effects can be reduced or remedied. 

> The truth is, there’s also a [lack of evidence of damage](http://sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0065211315001492) to the soil because there’s not a consistent framework for assessing it, there are other elements affecting soil such as management practices (crop rotation, tillage), and a limited amount of long term studies on the topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The truth is, there’s also a [lack of evidence of damage](http://sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0065211315001492) to the soil because there’s not a consistent framework for assessing it, there are other elements affecting soil such as management practices (crop rotation, tillage), and there's a limited amount of long term studies on the topic.
```

Effects on food crops are another topic entirely and one that’s been widely discussed. However, we’re focusing on side effects regarding the soil and not the plant itself.

### Glyphosate-resistant weeds

> Intense and continuous use of herbicide resulted in the constant evolution of herbicide-resistant weeds, increasing with time. There are about [266 weeds](https://www.weedscience.org/Home.aspx) that resist approximately 164 different herbicides throughout 71 countries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Intense and continuous use of herbicides resulted in the constant evolution of herbicide-resistant weeds, which are increasing with time. About [266 weeds](https://www.weedscience.org/Home.aspx) resist approximately 164 different herbicides throughout 71 countries.
```

Common treatment recommendations go from managing the intensity of glyphosate to rotating or tank-mixing it with herbicides that have different modes of action. It is also recommended to scout the field to identify the weeds and record their locations. However, this also means incurring in further expenses, as tank mixes, for example, are not usually cheap.

<figure>
  <img style="width: 100%" src="/images/farming-ml/herbicidesxtime.png">
</figure>
[Image source](https://blogs.cornell.edu/whatscroppingup/2020/03/23/statewide-herbicide-resistance-screening-to-start-in-2020-help-us-to-help-you/)

## How ML can solve these problems

The rise of deep learning algorithms and computer vision systems brought new possibilities to solve problems in an abundance of industries and fields of expertise. In this case, the design of DL models using image classification and object detection seems a natural answer to many of the problems troubling producers in agriculture.

> Solutions are coming in the shape of targeted spraying tractors based on deep learning methods that process live images locate, and classify different kinds of weeds on the soil, allowing the model to determine the best course of action for each specific case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Solutions are coming in the shape of targeted spraying tractors based on deep learning methods that process live images, locate, and classify different kinds of weeds on the soil, allowing the model to determine the best course of action for each specific case.
```

![data set](/images/farming-ml/dataset.png)

[Image source](https://www.imageclef.org/2013/plant)

So no matter the dataset you choose (MS COCO, ImageNet, etc.), you won’t have to train your model from zero to recognize and classify plant images.

The main obstacle that this model faces is that the landscape will invariably change. Trees, plants, and crops all grow; different lights, weather patterns, branches, and other objects might come loose on the ground, mud, uniform terrain, etc. Furthermore, different regions have specific plant species and weeds, making it challenging to find a solution that works with similar results and efficiency everywhere. This is where a good dataset becomes key.

> An accurate dataset is possible by creating it with all possible scenarios in mind. This is done by altering the training images of the data set with random noise, rotating it, generating symmetric images, removing small patches of it, selecting patches and discarding the rest, changing color and light, etc., as well as domain-specific alterations such as day, night and rain simulations. This will improve the model’s performance in the changing landscapes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An accurate dataset is achieved by creating it with all possible scenarios in mind. This is done by altering the training images of the data set with random noise, rotating it, generating symmetric images, removing small patches of it, selecting patches and discarding the rest, changing color and light, etc., as well as domain-specific alterations such as day, night, and rain simulations. This will improve the model’s performance in the changing landscapes.
```

The system developed for John Deere detects weeds and automatically turns individual nozzles off and on for the desired spray length to hit just the weed. They claim this solution causes farmers to use 77% less herbicide. Their ML model is based on millions of images of weeds collected over 5+ years.

The system already comes integrated into their John Deere Sprayer, which minimizes input costs. However, it works only for fallow grounds, as it detects the weeds by differentiating their green color from the darker soil, so if you were to use it in planted terrain, the challenges would be many.

![See & Spray™ ([image source](https://johndeerevirtualpavilion.co.nz/see-and-spray-select/))](/images/farming-ml/See_Spray.gif)

See & Spray™ ([image source](https://johndeerevirtualpavilion.co.nz/see-and-spray-select/))

> Smart Spraying works similarly to the solution described throughout the post. By using cameras and AI, their system distinguishes plants from weeds and the software automatically selects and applies the correct type of herbicide where it’s needed. ThisSmart Spraying works similarly to the solution described throughout the post. Using cameras and AI, their system distinguishes plants from weeds, and the software automatically selects and applies the correct type of herbicide where needed. This solution is broader than John Deere’s, meaning it can be used in other scenarios besides the fallow ground. It’s also extremely fast, recognizing and spraying the weed in 300 milliseconds.solution is broader than John Deere’s, meaning it can be used in other scenarios besides the fallow ground. It’s also extremely fast, recognizing and spraying the weed in 300 milliseconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart Spraying works similarly to the solution described throughout the post. By using cameras and AI, their system distinguishes plants from weeds and the software automatically selects and applies the correct type of herbicide where it’s needed. Smart Spraying works similarly to the solution described throughout the post. Using cameras and AI, their system distinguishes plants from weeds, and the software automatically selects and applies the correct type of herbicide where needed. This solution is broader than John Deere’s, meaning it can be used in other scenarios besides the fallow ground. It’s also extremely fast, recognizing and spraying the weed in 300 milliseconds.
```
